For d-block elements, the outermost principal energy level is the period number minus 1.
D-block Elements Energy Level

Each orbital can hold a maximum of 2 electrons. Therefore, s can hold 2, p can hold 6, d can hold 10, and f can hold 14 electrons.
Maximum Electrons in Each Subshell

Electrons are arranged in fixed energy levels (n) around the nucleus. Only worked for the hydrogen atom.
Niels Bohr's Atomic Model

An orbital can hold a maximum of 2 electrons.
Maximum Electrons in an Orbital


The number of subshells corresponds to the principal energy level (n). For n=1, there is 1 subshell; for n=2, there are 2 subshells, etc.
Number of Subshells per Energy Level

The speed of light is 3.0 x 10^8 meters per second.
Speed of Light


The periodic table consists of 18 groups or families.
Group Families of the Periodic Table

Excitation (endothermic) absorbs energy, and relaxation (exothermic) releases energy, causing electron transitions between levels.
Excitation and Relaxation Process

Lothar Meyer and Dmitriv Mendeleev organized the first periodic table based on increasing atomic mass.
Meyer & Mendeleev

Atoms of the same eulement that have the same number of protons but different number of neutrons.
Isotopes

Proposed that atoms are indivisible particles that combine in simple whole-number ratios to form compounds.
John Dalton's Atomic Theory

If you have more than one orbital with the same energy, you cannot pair electrons until you have one in each orbital.
Pauli's Exclusion Principle


The periodic table consists of 7 horizontal rows called periods.
Periods of the Periodic Table

Elements in the bottom two rows, called inner transition metals (lanthanides and actinides).
Inner Transition Elements

Atoms of a particular element have identical properties (false in the case of isotopes).
Atoms of a Particular Element

For electrons to occupy the same orbital, they must have opposite spins.
Hund's Rule

For f-block elements, the outermost principal energy level is the period number minus 2.
F-block Elements Energy Level

Each subshell can hold a specific number of orbitals: s=1, p=3, d=5, f=7.
Maximum Number of Orbitals


